Welcome to the Inside Story.
In the Book of Acts, chapter 1, verse 8,
Jesus said to His disciples that they would be witnesses of Him
to the most distant part of the earth.
And today, we are going to meet guests
from the 157th class who are serving in distant parts of the earth.
So let's meet our first guest, Brother Fernando Samal from Brazil.
Welcome, Fernando.
Thank you.
It's good to have you on the Inside Story.
You come from Brazil.
You're serving at the branch there in Sao Paulo.
Yes.
But I know there is a place in Brazil that is very close to your heart.
I love the Amazon region.
So what is it about the Amazon region, Fernando?
Maybe two words, the people.
Nice.
They are amazing.
I'm interested.
What is it about the people there?
They really accept the truth.
They have a good inclination to serve Jehovah
or to hear about God.
And it's amazing because we are able to preach to them all the time.
So what is it like to actually preach to them?
What's it like to converse with them?
We can talk about many different matters.
But since they live in the middle of the jungle,
the middle of the creation that Jehovah made to us,
we can use that to help them.
And of course, they face some challenges that the new world will solve.
And this can be the matter that we talk with them.
Nice.
Now, how is it that you first visited the Amazon?
I've been there many years ago.
We received in our house one brother that went to MTS in Sao Paulo.
And he was serving that time in About over there.
And he invited us to visit.
And I went there with my two flesh brothers for the first time.
Nice.
So he started the fire in you for the Amazon region.
Have they had preaching campaigns in the region?
Yes.
They made this a few years ago, a big campaign.
With a lot of good results.
We saw the increase over there.
Many people are coming to the truth.
New congregations, new circuits.
And many brothers are supporting the work over there.
You mentioned that something that really touched you
about the brothers who participated in the preaching campaigns.
Can you tell us about that?
A few of them decided to stay.
They went just to support for maybe one week, two weeks.
But then they noticed the need.
And they decided to stay.
They moved to over there.
They are serving and taking the lead in the congregation.
For me, this is amazing.
I know in Brazil you have some SKE schools.
How is SKE been used to support the work in the Amazon region?
They are saving in the last years.
Many brothers to serve over there.
After the school, they are assigned to those congregations
that they need help.
And it's been amazing gift from Jehovah, actually,
to help the growing over there.
Very nice.
Now, the Brazil branch and audio video services
have prepared a video about preaching in the Amazon region.
So I'm really looking forward to seeing what it's like there
and why it's so special to you.
So let's enjoy it together.
Let's see.
Brazil is vast.
It is the largest country in South America
and the fifth largest in the world.
It contains a wide range of landscapes,
including wetlands, savannas, mountains, and rainforests.
It is home to the largest river system in the world,
the mighty Amazon.
We have about 920,000 publishers in Brazil.
New congregations and new circuits are being formed every year
with approximately 25,000 people getting baptized each year.
Yes, Brazil is on fire.
However, there is too much work to be done.
Did you know there are more than 28 million people
living in the Amazon region of Brazil
and hundreds of indigenous languages are spoken.
An incredible help has been the school for Kingdom evangelizers.
Here in Brazil, we have two educational centers for SKE,
as well as some satellite locations.
In the past two years alone, 54 classes have been held.
The school is very focused on the Amazon region
because there's such a need there.
In fact, a quarter of all graduates from Brazil go to that area.
But once the graduates arrive, they are not left on their own.
The local brothers teach them things like,
what to say or not say, how to act in certain situations.
The teachers are the local brothers.
The dynamics of preaching in the Amazon region
involves traveling great distances.
I remember during our first visits into the interior,
the local brothers would say,
brother, you need more time here for us to go into the interior.
And I thought, I'm already in the interior.
Then we discover that there is an interior of the interior
that involves even more days of travel and longer boat trips.
We graduated from SKE on October 6, 2024.
And we were assigned to the Amazonist region.
This made us a bit anxious at first
because we had no idea what that area would be like
or if we would find work or not.
Honestly, we expected it to be more difficult.
But it was completely the opposite.
We're doing really well here.
This assignment has been a true gift for us.
Field service in the Amazon is great.
People are so receptive.
As you can see, Brazil is a big country
with a big heart to go with it.
Jehovah is indeed blessing our hard-working brothers and sisters
as they joyfully share in reaching those
in the remote areas of Brazil.
That is amazing Fernando.
Really, really impressive.
The work that's going on there in that region.
Yeah.
May I ask you, what has been your longest trip to the Amazon region?
I've been there for more than 20 days.
20-25 days around of that.
Good.
How long did it take you to get there?
Sometimes more than one day by boat.
This is what it calls low boat.
We have fast boats, airplane, but it's nice.
You can enjoy the trip.
It's beautiful, amazing river.
Whatever way you go to be able to preach the word.
Yes.
It's a great place.
Thank you very much Fernando.
Thanks for sharing your special place with us here on the Inside Story.
A pleasure.
Let's meet our next guests.
It's Carla and Judah Kern from Central America.
Carla and Judah, nice to have you.
You're on the Inside Story.
You're both serving presently in Mexico at the Central America branch.
How long have you been in Mexico?
Seven years now, not too long.
We were serving in Honduras in the field before that.
I know you come from Canada, but how did you get to Honduras?
My parents.
Growing up, Mom and Dad were always looking for where to serve,
where he was great.
We moved a lot when I was a kid.
I have a brother and a sister.
Our family of five was constantly on the move.
When I was 15, Mom and Dad told us we're thinking,
next move, Honduras.
We thought, okay, sounds fun.
Literally, we just packed our car.
Everything we could inside our car on top of our car,
said goodbye to our family in Canada,
and drove from Canada to Honduras.
As a kid, a 15-year-old, Honduras became home.
The ministry became my life.
I started pioneering soon after we got there.
I got appointed as a special pioneer,
so that was really nice to be assigned to isolated areas of the country
as well.
I got to serve on an island called Guanajá,
in the mosquito coast.
Beautiful experiences throughout the country.
Very nice.
Now, I know you told me your Dad's a planner,
so maybe to a 15-year-old felt like you just packed the car and left.
He probably did more than that, but it seemed like that.
What about you, Carla?
How did you get to Honduras?
Well, I was born in Ireland,
and my parents are from England.
They were both intrepid.
When they were younger, they moved to Ireland,
so where the name was greater.
They met there, got married, started special pioneering together.
And when my brother and I came along,
they carried on special pioneering together with us.
So we were raised in the ministry.
They really loved it, and they helped us to love it as well.
So when I moved away from home after I finished school,
I started pioneering.
Yeah, I just carried on enjoying the ministry.
But around that time, there was a lot of my friends were reaching out
to serve with and he was greater abroad.
So that was something I didn't always became a good goal for me as well,
to expand my ministry.
So one day a friend invited me.
She sent me a message.
She said, there's a chance for us to go to Honduras together.
It's a small island called Guanajá,
in the middle of the Caribbean.
It's like, why not?
It doesn't sound like something you should turn down.
But at the time, I had no money.
I had nothing in the bank.
I was filling my car up with two dollars worth of petrol at a time.
I'm not going very far.
And just at that time, within the half hour of her message,
my work offered me a full-time position for a couple of months.
So I said, yes.
So Jehovah gave me a way to go to Honduras.
So I went after three months of working.
And I arrived in a very small little island in the middle of the Caribbean
and a special pioneer who had red hair picked me up in a boat.
And that's what I'm saying.
We were married within the year.
You said, due to that, it became home for you.
Is there anything specific about Honduras or Central America,
Mexico that made it feel like home?
Like Fernando said, the people.
And when my family arrived to Honduras, we saw it right away.
Like I mentioned, we drove to Honduras.
So seven days, family of five, sitting together,
you can imagine what that journey would have been like.
But arriving in the country, you arrived in the middle of a hurricane,
which we didn't know when we left Canada.
So day seven coming into Honduras, hurricane Mitch, we caught.
And we were driving through the country in the pouring rain
and got to a little town where we got stuck.
There was no going forward.
The road was blocked by water.
We went back.
They had closed the bridge already.
So I couldn't speak the language.
I was stuck in a little town.
I couldn't.
So dad just rolled the window down and said all he could in Spanish.
Testigo, stay.
Heo va.
Something like that in this broken Spanish.
Jehovah's Witnesses.
He spoke better Spanish after that.
And sure enough, the man who was there pointed.
There was a sister just there, one of the, I think,
seven publishers in that town at the time.
So they took us in.
They were in the middle of a hurricane suffering.
And they were happy to have us.
They were feeding us fried chicken.
One of the sisters had a little restaurant there.
We were excited about that.
So for a few days, we were stuck in this town.
But what a welcome we got in their homes.
And that's how it was everywhere we went.
Just into people's homes.
They loved to have us.
It was such a warm family.
Warm welcome and hospitality.
How would you describe the hospitality, Carla?
Yeah, I would say that's straight away you're in,
you're in with them.
What do you mean by that?
As in, there's no breaking the ice phase.
There's no warming up to you phase.
It's like straight away as soon as you arrive in the congregation,
you're in with them.
So you're passing by their house, for example,
and you're thirsty, you're hot.
They invite you in.
They sit you in front of a fan.
They give you water.
You need an app.
They have a bed.
They have a hammock.
They have a porch if you want a porch.
So their hospitality is never just on their terms.
It's to meet the needs that you have.
So whatever need you had at that time,
they were just willing to fill it.
Nice.
They came pick up you in the airport to feed it.
This is very nice.
I learned it quickly.
Judah, for you, as a young single special pioneer,
did you enjoy the hospitality?
I did, and I have to say that it was kind of embarrassing
the hospitality I was shown so much
so that I pretty much never cooked.
So...
He still doesn't.
And that's why I never got to learn how to cook.
There were just two hospitable assignments that I was...
Thank you, brothers and sisters.
Very, very nice.
Yeah, that just makes it home going to a distant land
and to be so warmly welcomed.
In fact, there was an expression they would use
when they would invite me over.
They'll say, just come on in.
We'll add more water to the soup.
So that was the expression,
no matter what they were eating,
it was a figurative expression, but it was beautiful.
Do you have an expression like that in Portuguese?
Yes, we add water to the beans.
Yeah, with the same idea.
Same idea.
Yes, nice.
What about the ministry, though?
What does it like to preach in the areas where you've served?
In Central America and in Honduras,
where we were just such a respect for the Bible,
so so easy to start conversations.
And that meant getting to know our Bibles.
I remember when we got there,
I'd not use the Bible much in the ministry,
maybe a verse I'd memorize,
but then I'd be going in service with families that had kids,
maybe 10 years old,
that knew all these scriptures, different ones they were reading.
And I'm like, how do they know so many verses in the Bible?
But then just going more in service,
I realized it's because everybody wants to hear the Bible.
So that was really nice getting to know the Scriptures.
What about for you, Carla?
So coming from Ireland to Honduras,
was there much of a learning curve for you?
Yeah, the same as Judah,
just getting to know your Bible.
So maybe you're used to using just one or two Scriptures at a door.
You had your favorites,
but there you could just like use the whole range of the Bible.
So that was really nice getting to know the Bible better.
Also getting to know the publications,
because there's so many opportunities to conduct Bible studies,
so you really got familiar with them and the publications.
And also, something I really appreciated was,
you'd arrive at their house.
They weren't expecting you,
but they sat you down,
they got their Bible out.
And as you were speaking, they would take notes and lines.
So seeing their appreciation for the Bible really helps,
kind of like cement it down for you,
as well just how amazing the Bible is.
Oh, what a beautiful experience, so nice.
The branch in Central America,
along with the AVS, has prepared a nice video
for us to be able to see some of these areas
and perhaps some of this hospitality
and looking forward to seeing it with you.
Me too.
Central America is a large region of land,
that includes the countries of Panama,
Costa Rica,
Nicaragua,
Honduras,
El Salvador,
Guatemala,
and Belize.
It extends in an arc roughly 1800 kilometers
or 1,100 miles in length from the northwest to the southeast.
And no matter where you live in Central America,
there were never more than 200 kilometers
or 125 miles away from the sea.
By September 2012,
the preaching work in Costa Rica,
El Salvador,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Panama
all came under the supervision
of the Central America branch in Mexico.
What efforts are being made to reach honest hearted ones
in some of the diverse areas of Central America?
It has truly been a beautiful experience
to be here in El Salvador.
The training that we received
at the School for Kingdom Evangelizers
has been so helpful
because it taught us that beyond delivering a message,
it is important to have empathy
and really listen and understand people.
Well, people here are quite religious
and devoted to their faith.
I try to demonstrate Christian qualities,
like those we're learning
in the love people make disciples brochure.
Today, we observe people
and listen to what they want to express.
We wait for the right moment to preach to them.
That indicates that Jehovah
is blessing the efforts
we make to find the deserving ones.
Here in La Seiva,
we preach in different languages,
for example, sign language,
mosquito,
garifuna, and Spanish.
Jehovah has really blessed
the efforts of the publishers here.
The local people are amazed
when one greets them in their language.
And that is something that has been very positive.
We also have the use of JW.org
and their face is shine
when they are shown a video in their language.
They are completely amazed and very happy
that we have made videos in their language.
We have seen Jehovah's blessing in the territory
and also the support from our brothers.
Feeling like we have many partners to preach with
to make return visits
and conduct Bible studies.
This makes the ministry even more enjoyable.
Mexico City is one of the largest cities in the world.
Just the main city
has a population of over 9 million.
Many languages are spoken.
Not just the main languages like English, Spanish, French,
but also indigenous languages.
The number of languages
presents a big challenge
because how do we reach all those people?
Well, one thing that has really helped
is public witnessing.
We have, for example,
over 24 locations
for special metropolitan witnessing
just in Mexico City.
So that opens up a big opportunity
to reach people in their native language.
So recently two groups were formed in Haitian Creole.
It's beautiful, the welcome people
who speak another language
and be able to learn it
to transmit Jehovah's message in that language.
As you can see,
Central America's diversity is also its beauty.
Jehovah's people are reflecting like mirrors his great love
in reaching out to people
of all nationalities, tongues, and backgrounds.
Remarkable.
Thank you so much for that.
It's amazing to see the work that's just the variety
of places and the work that's being done there.
I noticed there's a lot of water,
a lot of water, a lot of beaches.
Do you swim there?
Yes, on the island where we were,
pretty much every week we would spend a nice day
at the beach enjoying the water,
snarkling.
Crystal clear, beautiful.
Miss it.
Crystal clear.
A lot of water in the Amazon region.
Do you swim there?
Yes.
But it's not crystal and clear all the time.
And sometimes we have crocodiles.
And pinangas.
We need to look.
Yeah, what is possible to do that?
But again,
Judan, just a beautiful spirit.
We see the brothers and sisters there in the hard work.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for letting us talk to you
about the amazing preaching work there in Central America.
Thank you.
Let's meet our next guests.
It's Christian and Karina Zagetti from the Philippines.
Christian and Karina, welcome.
Thank you for being here with us on the Inside Story.
So you both are serving in the Philippines at the Philippines branch,
but you're not from the Philippines, you're from Brazil.
So how did you get from Brazil to the Philippines?
That's a good question.
I'm asking myself how I ended up there.
So actually we got transferred from Brazil branch to the Philippines branch
for a project for a computer department initially for two years.
Initially, it's a long project.
Yes.
We've been there for almost 15 years now.
Well, that's beautiful though.
But how did it happen?
What was it that happened that got you to the Philippines?
Yes, so we got an invitation.
There were possibilities for us to serve in another branch.
So I was serving as a single in Brazil for 12 years.
And we got married.
I was there.
Fernando was there.
Yes.
He was in our wedding.
We got approved to stay in Beto.
And then just a few months after we got married,
we had this possibility to serve in another branch.
But we consider, talk about it, pray about it.
We've been up there time.
You're in Beto.
But you ended up in the Philippines.
That just three months later, this next opportunity came.
New invitation to go to the Philippines.
So we realized you're over one in us to go to a foreign assignment.
And we prayed about it and say yes.
We didn't want to be like John and say no.
So we're like, let's go.
Well, John was a courageous prophet.
And you're courageous.
Jonah went to his assignment.
And here you are in the Philippines.
So a long way from home, what would you say that helped make the Philippines your home?
Definitely the brotherhood.
Jehovah's organization, it's truly a big family.
And being so far from home, we can feel the love from the brothers in the congregation
and in the Beto family.
How they welcomed us.
Always so concerned for our well-being.
And also, they went always out of their way to care for us.
So it was beautiful to see and that definitely made us feel home pretty quickly.
I'm sure it would.
Can you think of an example, Christian, of how they did that for you?
Well, the brothers, they did so many things for us to feel at home.
So I think one thing that touched our hearts was when we were still having the food arrangement in Beto
so we had to go down to the dining hall to have breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
So we had this single brother in our table, in the dining hall.
And he was from one of the distant provinces in the country.
And we were having a little bit of hard time to have fish and rice for breakfast.
So we were still trying to have fish and rice.
Yes, big eyes.
With big eyes, with the tail, the whole fish there.
But this brother, I think he was concerned about us.
And he said, hey, what is your favorite food?
I didn't have anything to say at the moment.
I just thought about maybe a hamburger with fries.
I think that's my favorite food, I guess.
So instead of fish and rice for breakfast, hamburger and fries for breakfast?
I would say for lunch and dinner.
But then the next following day, right in front of our Beto room,
there was a package there and the brother gave it to us.
And he was like concerned about our well-being.
So it was amazing.
It was just a little thing, but among so many others.
It meant a lot.
Yeah.
Made for us.
For us to feel at home, yeah.
So in the package was a hamburger and fries.
A hamburger.
Amazing, happy.
That's true.
Well, it would make you feel at home.
Yeah.
That's absolutely beautiful.
And so you're serving at the branch.
The branches in Manila.
Manila is one of the most densely populated cities in the world.
So what is preaching like in the city of Manila?
Yeah, that's true.
It's one of the most densely populated cities in the world.
There's a lot of people everywhere.
But the good thing is that they are really...
It's not hard to talk to people about the truth or about the Bible,
especially the Bible.
Like Judamation and Fernandomation about these regions.
So they have a real respect for the Bible.
So we have all these arrangements in place,
like street witnessing, metropolitan witnessing,
cart witnessing.
We have a variety of business territories to covert.
And we also have mall witnessing.
Mall witnessing.
Mall witnessing is an interesting form of preaching.
It's hard to not get distracted by the stores.
And I love the coffee shops there.
But it's interesting.
You can still meet and talk to people in these areas.
And they are fine if you approach them in the right moment,
the right time.
You mean in the coffee shop?
In the coffee shop.
You can't be in the coffee shop.
Now I see my Christian loves coffee so much.
Yeah.
I would like to try to find a shopping mall
in the middle of the Amazon rainforest.
With the coffee shop.
Yeah, it would be nice.
Again, the branch in the Philippines and AVS have prepared a video.
We're looking forward to seeing what preaching is like in the Philippines,
particularly in the metropolitan and other areas.
So let's look at it.
The Philippines is an island country of Southeast Asia,
located in a Pacific Ocean.
It consists of more than 7,000 islands and eyelids,
about 800 kilometers or 500 miles off the cost of Vietnam.
Did you know that Philippines is the second most popular Asian country
with English as an official language following India?
The capital Manila is part of a greater metropolitan region known as
metropolitan Manila.
Interestingly, well, this is the smallest region in the Philippines.
It is also the most densely populated,
being home to over 13 million Filipinos.
What is it like to preach in this densely populated area?
More than 10% of the publishers in the Philippines reside in Metro Manila.
That is over 30,000 publishers.
Interestingly, over 9,400 of them serve as regular pioneers.
Metro Manila is a city of contrast.
It has high buildings in its central business districts.
It also has informal settlements in narrow streets and alleyways.
A street of less than a kilometer can be home to hundreds of families.
Some congregations in our circuit,
especially those that are in the metropolitan area,
are assigned to work on many apartment buildings.
So the congregation body of elders have trained specific individuals
to be able to penetrate these areas effectively.
As in Metro Manila are so densely populated,
we don't always have accurate maps or specific addresses for everyone.
So it can be a real challenge to determine whether these areas have been well covered or not.
But thanks to good democratic training and useful online tools,
these areas are getting mapped out.
The Filipino Sign Language Territory is an interesting field in Metro Manila.
Many brothers and sisters have learned the Sign Language
in order to help the deaf ones learn the good news.
We can see Jehovah's Blessing through the fulfillment of Haggai chapter 2 verse 7.
It feels as though Jehovah is indeed shaking these territories
so that the precious ones, those rightly disposed hearts,
will come to his organization and serve him.
Personally, it's very encouraging to see how the brothers and sisters endure faithfully and joyfully.
They endure not because they do not have a choice.
They endure because they are happy, doing God's work and loving the people.
Yes, as you can see, the Philippines is a preaching paradise.
Jehovah is making sure that no one gets mis in this historic time of the end.
Wow, there is so much being done and so much work to do.
Let me ask you this though, the brother mentioned there are so many publishers in the Metro Manila era
and a lot of regular pioneers.
Even with so many publishers there, is there still a need?
Yes, there is still a need.
It's actually one of the regions in the country that there is a growth in publishers.
As a matter of fact, nearly 20% of those who were baptized in the Philippines
were coming from this particular area in Manila region.
So there is growth there for sure.
Wow, interesting. Thank you so much.
Christian Karina, thank you so much for being here and thank you for your self-sacrificing spirit
in being in the Philippines, making it your home and supporting the work that's going on there.
And we say thank you to all of you for being with us on the inside story
and your self-sacrificing spirit to support the preaching work.
Jesus said, the fields are white for harvesting and what we've seen today indeed they are.
And it's beautiful to see the spirit, the intrepid spirit of our brothers and sisters
in preaching the good news of God's kingdom,
and also to see the support of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers
to help this work grow worldwide.
We look forward to seeing all of you on another edition of the Inside Story.